An End-to-End Trainable Neural Network for Image-based Sequence
Recognition and Its Application to Scene Text Recognition
Baoguang Shi, Xiang Bai and Cong Yao
School of Electronic Information and Communications
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{shibaoguang,xbai}@hust.edu.cn, yaocong2010@gmail.com
Abstract
Image-based sequence recognition has been a long-
standing research topic in computer vision. In this pa-
per, we investigate the problem of scene text recognition,
which is among the most important and challenging tasks
in image-based sequence recognition. A novel neural net-
work architecture, which integrates feature extraction, se-
quence modeling and transcription into a uniﬁed frame-
work, is proposed. Compared with previous systems for
scene text recognition, the proposed architecture possesses
four distinctive properties: (1) It is end-to-end trainable,
in contrast to most of the existing algorithms whose compo-
nents are separately trained and tuned. (2) It naturally han-
dles sequences in arbitrary lengths, involving no character
segmentation or horizontal scale normalization. (3) It is not
conﬁned to any predeﬁned lexicon and achieves remarkable
performances in both lexicon-free and lexicon-based scene
text recognition tasks. (4) It generates an effective yet much
smaller model, which is more practical for real-world ap-
plication scenarios. The experiments on standard bench-
marks, including the IIIT-5K, Street View Text and ICDAR
datasets, demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algo-
rithm over the prior arts. Moreover, the proposed algorithm
performs well in the task of image-based music score recog-
nition, which evidently veriﬁes the generality of it.
1. Introduction
Recently, the community has seen a strong revival of
neural networks, which is mainly stimulated by the great
success of deep neural network models, speciﬁcally Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN), in various vision
tasks. However, majority of the recent works related to deep
neural networks have devoted to detection or classiﬁcation
of object categories [12, 25]. In this paper, we are con-
cerned with a classic problem in computer vision: image-
based sequence recognition. In real world, a stable of vi-
sual objects, such as scene text, handwriting and musical
score, tend to occur in the form of sequence, not in isola-
tion. Unlike general object recognition, recognizing such
sequence-like objects often requires the system to predict
a series of object labels, instead of a single label. There-
fore, recognition of such objects can be naturally cast as a
sequence recognition problem. Another unique property of
sequence-like objects is that their lengths may vary drasti-
cally. For instance, English words can either consist of 2
characters such as “OK” or 15 characters such as “congrat-
ulations”. Consequently, the most popular deep models like
DCNN [25, 26] cannot be directly applied to sequence pre-
diction, since DCNN models often operate on inputs and
outputs with ﬁxed dimensions, and thus are incapable of
producing a variable-length label sequence.
Some attempts have been made to address this problem
for a speciﬁc sequence-like object ( e.g. scene text). For
example, the algorithms in [35, 8] ﬁrstly detect individual
characters and then recognize these detected characters with
DCNN models, which are trained using labeled character
images. Such methods often require training a strong char-
acter detector for accurately detecting and cropping each
character out from the original word image. Some other
approaches (such as [22]) treat scene text recognition as
an image classiﬁcation problem, and assign a class label
to each English word (90K words in total). It turns out a
large trained model with a huge number of classes, which
is difﬁcult to be generalized to other types of sequence-
like objects, such as Chinese texts, musical scores, etc., be-
cause the numbers of basic combinations of such kind of
sequences can be greater than 1 million. In summary, cur-
rent systems based on DCNN can not be directly used for
image-based sequence recognition.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) models, another im-
portant branch of the deep neural networks family, were
mainly designed for handling sequences. One of the ad-
vantages of RNN is that it does not need the position of
each element in a sequence object image in both training
and testing. However, a preprocessing step that converts
1
arXiv:1507.05717v1  [cs.CV]  21 Jul 2015
an input object image into a sequence of image features, is
usually essential. For example, Graves et al. [16] extract a
set of geometrical or image features from handwritten texts,
while Su and Lu [33] convert word images into sequential
HOG features. The preprocessing step is independent of
the subsequent components in the pipeline, thus the existing
systems based on RNN can not be trained and optimized in
an end-to-end fashion.
Several conventional scene text recognition methods that
are not based on neural networks also brought insightful
ideas and novel representations into this ﬁeld. For example,
Almaz`an et al. [5] and Rodriguez-Serrano et al. [30] pro-
posed to embed word images and text strings in a common
vectorial subspace, and word recognition is converted into
a retrieval problem. Yao et al. [36] and Gordo et al. [14]
used mid-level features for scene text recognition. Though
achieved promising performance on standard benchmarks,
these methods are generally outperformed by previous al-
gorithms based on neural networks [8, 22], as well as the
approach proposed in this paper.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel neural
network model, whose network architecture is speciﬁcally
designed for recognizing sequence-like objects in images.
The proposed neural network model is named as Convo-
lutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN), since it is a
combination of DCNN and RNN. For sequence-like ob-
jects, CRNN possesses several distinctive advantages over
conventional neural network models: 1) It can be directly
learned from sequence labels (for instance, words), requir-
ing no detailed annotations (for instance, characters); 2) It
has the same property of DCNN on learning informative
representations directly from image data, requiring neither
hand-craft features nor preprocessing steps, including bi-
narization/segmentation, component localization, etc.; 3) It
has the same property of RNN, being able to produce a se-
quence of labels; 4) It is unconstrained to the lengths of
sequence-like objects, requiring only height normalization
in both training and testing phases; 5) It achieves better or
highly competitive performance on scene texts (word recog-
nition) than the prior arts [23, 8]; 6) It contains much less
parameters than a standard DCNN model, consuming less
storage space.
2. The Proposed Network Architecture
The network architecture of CRNN, as shown in Fig. 1,
consists of three components, including the convolutional
layers, the recurrent layers, and a transcription layer, from
bottom to top.
At the bottom of CRNN, the convolutional layers auto-
matically extract a feature sequence from each input image.
On top of the convolutional network, a recurrent network
is built for making prediction for each frame of the feature
sequence, outputted by the convolutional layers. The tran-
scription layer at the top of CRNN is adopted to translate the
per-frame predictions by the recurrent layers into a label se-
quence. Though CRNN is composed of different kinds of
network architectures (eg. CNN and RNN), it can be jointly
trained with one loss function.
...
Convolutional
Layers
...
Recurrent
Layers
- s - t - a a t t e
"state"
Transcription
Layer
Input image
Convolutional
feature maps
Convolutional
feature maps
Feature
sequence
Deep
bidirectional
LSTM
Per-frame
predictions
(disbritutions)
Predicted
sequence
......
......
...
...
Figure 1. The network architecture. The architecture consists of
three parts: 1) convolutional layers, which extract a feature se-
quence from the input image; 2) recurrent layers, which predict
a label distribution for each frame; 3) transcription layer, which
translates the per-frame predictions into the ﬁnal label sequence.
2.1. Feature Sequence Extraction
In CRNN model, the component of convolutional layers
is constructed by taking the convolutional and max-pooling
layers from a standard CNN model (fully-connected layers
are removed). Such component is used to extract a sequen-
tial feature representation from an input image. Before be-
ing fed into the network, all the images need to be scaled
to the same height. Then a sequence of feature vectors is
extracted from the feature maps produced by the compo-
nent of convolutional layers, which is the input for the re-
current layers. Speciﬁcally, each feature vector of a feature
sequence is generated from left to right on the feature maps
by column. This means the i-th feature vector is the con-
catenation of the i-th columns of all the maps. The width of
each column in our settings is ﬁxed to single pixel.
As the layers of convolution, max-pooling, and element-
wise activation function operate on local regions, they are
translation invariant. Therefore, each column of the feature
maps corresponds to a rectangle region of the original im-
age (termed the receptive ﬁeld), and such rectangle regions
are in the same order to their corresponding columns on the
feature maps from left to right. As illustrated in Fig. 2, each
vector in the feature sequence is associated with a receptive
ﬁeld, and can be considered as the image descriptor for that
region.
...
Feature Sequence
Receptive field
Figure 2. The receptive ﬁeld. Each vector in the extracted feature
sequence is associated with a receptive ﬁeld on the input image,
and can be considered as the feature vector of that ﬁeld.
Being robust, rich and trainable, deep convolutional fea-
tures have been widely adopted for different kinds of vi-
sual recognition tasks [25, 12]. Some previous approaches
have employed CNN to learn a robust representation for
sequence-like objects such as scene text [22]. However,
these approaches usually extract holistic representation of
the whole image by CNN, then the local deep features are
collected for recognizing each component of a sequence-
like object. Since CNN requires the input images to be
scaled to a ﬁxed size in order to satisfy with its ﬁxed input
dimension, it is not appropriate for sequence-like objects
due to their large length variation. In CRNN, we convey
deep features into sequential representations in order to be
invariant to the length variation of sequence-like objects.
2.2. Sequence Labeling
A deep bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network is built
on the top of the convolutional layers, as the recurrent lay-
ers. The recurrent layers predict a label distribution yt for
each frame xt in the feature sequence x = x1,...,x T. The
advantages of the recurrent layers are three-fold. Firstly,
RNN has a strong capability of capturing contextual in-
formation within a sequence. Using contextual cues for
image-based sequence recognition is more stable and help-
ful than treating each symbol independently. Taking scene
text recognition as an example, wide characters may re-
quire several successive frames to fully describe (refer to
Fig. 2). Besides, some ambiguous characters are easier to
distinguish when observing their contexts,e.g. it is easier to
recognize “il” by contrasting the character heights than by
recognizing each of them separately. Secondly, RNN can
back-propagates error differentials to its input, i.e. the con-
volutional layer, allowing us to jointly train the recurrent
layers and the convolutional layers in a uniﬁed network.
Cell
... ...
Forget
Gate
Output
Gate
tanh
Input
Gate
tanh
(a)
......
......
...
...
(b)
Figure 3. (a) The structure of a basic LSTM unit. An LSTM con-
sists of a cell module and three gates, namely the input gate, the
output gate and the forget gate. (b) The structure of deep bidirec-
tional LSTM we use in our paper. Combining a forward (left to
right) and a backward (right to left) LSTMs results in a bidirec-
tional LSTM. Stacking multiple bidirectional LSTM results in a
deep bidirectional LSTM.
Thirdly, RNN is able to operate on sequences of arbitrary
lengths, traversing from starts to ends.
A traditional RNN unit has a self-connected hidden layer
between its input and output layers. Each time it receives
a frame xt in the sequence, it updates its internal state ht
with a non-linear function that takes both current input xt
and past state ht−1 as its inputs: ht = g(xt,ht−1). Then
the prediction yt is made based on ht. In this way, past con-
texts {xt′ }t′<t are captured and utilized for prediction. Tra-
ditional RNN unit, however, suffers from the vanishing gra-
dient problem [7], which limits the range of context it can
store, and adds burden to the training process. Long-Short
Term Memory [18, 11] (LSTM) is a type of RNN unit that
is specially designed to address this problem. An LSTM (il-
lustrated in Fig. 3) consists of a memory cell and three mul-
tiplicative gates, namely the input, output and forget gates.
Conceptually, the memory cell stores the past contexts, and
the input and output gates allow the cell to store contexts
for a long period of time. Meanwhile, the memory in the
cell can be cleared by the forget gate. The special design of
LSTM allows it to capture long-range dependencies, which
often occur in image-based sequences.
LSTM is directional, it only uses past contexts. How-
ever, in image-based sequences, contexts from both direc-
tions are useful and complementary to each other. There-
fore, we follow [17] and combine two LSTMs, one forward
and one backward, into a bidirectional LSTM. Furthermore,
multiple bidirectional LSTMs can be stacked, resulting in
a deep bidirectional LSTM as illustrated in Fig. 3.b. The
deep structure allows higher level of abstractions than a
shallow one, and has achieved signiﬁcant performance im-
provements in the task of speech recognition [17].
In recurrent layers, error differentials are propagated in
the opposite directions of the arrows shown in Fig. 3.b,
i.e. Back-Propagation Through Time (BPTT). At the bot-
tom of the recurrent layers, the sequence of propagated dif-
ferentials are concatenated into maps, inverting the opera-
tion of converting feature maps into feature sequences, and
fed back to the convolutional layers. In practice, we create
a custom network layer, called “Map-to-Sequence”, as the
bridge between convolutional layers and recurrent layers.
2.3. Transcription
Transcription is the process of converting the per-frame
predictions made by RNN into a label sequence. Mathe-
matically, transcription is to ﬁnd the label sequence with
the highest probability conditioned on the per-frame pre-
dictions. In practice, there exists two modes of transcrip-
tion, namely the lexicon-free and lexicon-based transcrip-
tions. A lexicon is a set of label sequences that prediction
is constraint to, e.g. a spell checking dictionary. In lexicon-
free mode, predictions are made without any lexicon. In
lexicon-based mode, predictions are made by choosing the
label sequence that has the highest probability.
2.3.1 Probability of label sequence
We adopt the conditional probability deﬁned in the Con-
nectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) layer proposed
by Graves et al. [15]. The probability is deﬁned for la-
bel sequence l conditioned on the per-frame predictions
y = y1,...,y T, and it ignores the position where each la-
bel in l is located. Consequently, when we use the negative
log-likelihood of this probability as the objective to train the
network, we only need images and their corresponding la-
bel sequences, avoiding the labor of labeling positions of
individual characters.
The formulation of the conditional probability is brieﬂy
described as follows: The input is a sequence y =
y1,...,y T where T is the sequence length. Here, each
yt ∈ℜ|L′| is a probability distribution over the set L′ =
L∪ , where Lcontains all labels in the task ( e.g. all En-
glish characters), as well as a ’blank’ label denoted by . A
sequence-to-sequence mapping function Bis deﬁned on se-
quence π ∈L′T, where T is the length. Bmaps π onto l
by ﬁrstly removing the repeated labels, then removing the
’blank’s. For example, Bmaps “--hh-e-l-ll-oo--”
(’-’ represents ’blank’) onto “hello”. Then, the condi-
tional probability is deﬁned as the sum of probabilities of
all π that are mapped by Bonto l:
p(l|y) =
∑
π:B(π)=l
p(π|y), (1)
where the probability of π is deﬁned as p(π|y) =∏T
t=1 yt
πt, yt
πt is the probability of having label πt at time
stamp t. Directly computing Eq. 1 would be computa-
tionally infeasible due to the exponentially large number
of summation items. However, Eq. 1 can be efﬁciently
computed using the forward-backward algorithm described
in [15].
2.3.2 Lexicon-free transcription
In this mode, the sequence l∗ that has the highest proba-
bility as deﬁned in Eq. 1 is taken as the prediction. Since
there exists no tractable algorithm to precisely ﬁnd the so-
lution, we use the strategy adopted in [15]. The sequence l∗
is approximately found by l∗ ≈B(arg maxπ p(π|y)), i.e.
taking the most probable label πt at each time stamp t, and
map the resulted sequence onto l∗.
2.3.3 Lexicon-based transcription
In lexicon-based mode, each test sample is associated with
a lexicon D. Basically, the label sequence is recognized
by choosing the sequence in the lexicon that has high-
est conditional probability deﬁned in Eq. 1, i.e. l∗ =
arg maxl∈Dp(l|y). However, for large lexicons , e.g. the
50k-words Hunspell spell-checking dictionary [1], it would
be very time-consuming to perform an exhaustive search
over the lexicon, i.e. to compute Equation 1 for all se-
quences in the lexicon and choose the one with the high-
est probability. To solve this problem, we observe that the
label sequences predicted via lexicon-free transcription, de-
scribed in 2.3.2, are often close to the ground-truth under
the edit distance metric. This indicates that we can limit our
search to the nearest-neighbor candidatesNδ(l′), where δis
the maximal edit distance and l′is the sequence transcribed
from y in lexicon-free mode:
l∗= arg max
l∈Nδ(l′)
p(l|y). (2)
The candidates Nδ(l′) can be found efﬁciently with the
BK-tree data structure [9], which is a metric tree speciﬁ-
cally adapted to discrete metric spaces. The search time
complexity of BK-tree is O(log |D|), where |D|is the lex-
icon size. Therefore this scheme readily extends to very
large lexicons. In our approach, a BK-tree is constructed
ofﬂine for a lexicon. Then we perform fast online search
with the tree, by ﬁnding sequences that have less or equal to
δedit distance to the query sequence.
2.4. Network Training
Denote the training dataset by X= {Ii,li}i, where Ii is
the training image and li is the ground truth label sequence.
The objective is to minimize the negative log-likelihood of
conditional probability of ground truth:
O= −
∑
Ii,li∈X
log p(li|yi), (3)
where yiis the sequence produced by the recurrent and con-
volutional layers from Ii. This objective function calculates
a cost value directly from an image and its ground truth
label sequence. Therefore, the network can be end-to-end
trained on pairs of images and sequences, eliminating the
procedure of manually labeling all individual components
in training images.
The network is trained with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). Gradients are calculated by the back-propagation al-
gorithm. In particular, in the transcription layer, error dif-
ferentials are back-propagated with the forward-backward
algorithm, as described in [15]. In the recurrent layers, the
Back-Propagation Through Time (BPTT) is applied to cal-
culate the error differentials.
For optimization, we use the ADADELTA [37] to au-
tomatically calculate per-dimension learning rates. Com-
pared with the conventional momentum [31] method,
ADADELTA requires no manual setting of a learning
rate. More importantly, we ﬁnd that optimization using
ADADELTA converges faster than the momentum method.
3. Experiments
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed CRNN
model, we conducted experiments on standard benchmarks
for scene text recognition and musical score recognition,
which are both challenging vision tasks. The datasets and
setting for training and testing are given in Sec. 3.1, the de-
tailed settings of CRNN for scene text images is provided
in Sec. 3.2, and the results with the comprehensive compar-
isons are reported in Sec. 3.3. To further demonstrate the
generality of CRNN, we verify the proposed algorithm on a
music score recognition task in Sec. 3.4.
3.1. Datasets
For all the experiments for scene text recognition, we
use the synthetic dataset (Synth) released by Jaderberg et
al. [20] as the training data. The dataset contains 8 millions
training images and their corresponding ground truth words.
Such images are generated by a synthetic text engine and
are highly realistic. Our network is trained on the synthetic
data once, and tested on all other real-world test datasets
without any ﬁne-tuning on their training data. Even though
the CRNN model is purely trained with synthetic text data,
it works well on real images from standard text recognition
benchmarks.
Four popular benchmarks for scene text recognition are
used for performance evaluation, namely ICDAR 2003
(IC03), ICDAR 2013 (IC13), IIIT 5k-word (IIIT5k), and
Street View Text (SVT).
IC03 [27] test dataset contains 251 scene images with la-
beled text bounding boxes. Following Wang et al. [34], we
ignore images that either contain non-alphanumeric charac-
ters or have less than three characters, and get a test set with
Table 1. Network conﬁguration summary. The ﬁrst row is the top
layer. ‘k’, ‘s’ and ‘p’ stand for kernel size, stride and padding size
respectively
Type Conﬁgurations
Transcription -
Bidirectional-LSTM #hidden units:256
Bidirectional-LSTM #hidden units:256
Map-to-Sequence -
Convolution #maps:512, k:2 × 2, s:1, p:0
MaxPooling Window:1 × 2, s:2
BatchNormalization -
Convolution #maps:512, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
BatchNormalization -
Convolution #maps:512, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
MaxPooling Window:1 × 2, s:2
Convolution #maps:256, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
Convolution #maps:256, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
MaxPooling Window:2 × 2, s:2
Convolution #maps:128, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
MaxPooling Window:2 × 2, s:2
Convolution #maps:64, k:3 × 3, s:1, p:1
Input W × 32 gray-scale image
860 cropped text images. Each test image is associated with
a 50-words lexicon which is deﬁned by Wang et al. [34]. A
full lexicon is built by combining all the per-image lexi-
cons. In addition, we use a 50k words lexicon consisting of
the words in the Hunspell spell-checking dictionary [1].
IC13 [24] test dataset inherits most of its data from IC03.
It contains 1,015 ground truths cropped word images.
IIIT5k [28] contains 3,000 cropped word test images
collected from the Internet. Each image has been associ-
ated to a 50-words lexicon and a 1k-words lexicon.
SVT [34] test dataset consists of 249 street view images
collected from Google Street View. From them 647 word
images are cropped. Each word image has a 50 words lexi-
con deﬁned by Wang et al. [34].
3.2. Implementation Details
The network conﬁguration we use in our experiments
is summarized in Table 1. The architecture of the con-
volutional layers is based on the VGG-VeryDeep architec-
tures [32]. A tweak is made in order to make it suitable
for recognizing English texts. In the 3rd and the 4th max-
pooling layers, we adopt 1 ×2 sized rectangular pooling
windows instead of the conventional squared ones. This
tweak yields feature maps with larger width, hence longer
feature sequence. For example, an image containing 10
characters is typically of size100×32, from which a feature
sequence 25 frames can be generated. This length exceeds
the lengths of most English words. On top of that, the rect-
angular pooling windows yield rectangular receptive ﬁelds
(illustrated in Fig. 2), which are beneﬁcial for recognizing
some characters that have narrow shapes, such as ’i’ and ’l’.
The network not only has deep convolutional layers, but
also has recurrent layers. Both are known to be hard to
train. We ﬁnd that the batch normalization [19] technique
is extremely useful for training network of such depth. Two
batch normalization layers are inserted after the 5th and 6th
convolutional layers respectively. With the batch normal-
ization layers, the training process is greatly accelerated.
We implement the network within the Torch7 [10] frame-
work, with custom implementations for the LSTM units (in
Torch7/CUDA), the transcription layer (in C++) and the
BK-tree data structure (in C++). Experiments are carried
out on a workstation with a 2.50 GHz Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-
2609 CPU, 64GB RAM and an NVIDIA(R) Tesla(TM) K40
GPU. Networks are trained with ADADELTA, setting the
parameter ρ to 0.9. During training, all images are scaled
to 100 ×32 in order to accelerate the training process. The
training process takes about 50 hours to reach convergence.
Testing images are scaled to have height 32. Widths are
proportionally scaled with heights, but at least 100 pixels.
The average testing time is 0.16s/sample, as measured on
IC03 without a lexicon. The approximate lexicon search is
applied to the 50k lexicon of IC03, with the parameter δset
to 3. Testing each sample takes 0.53s on average.
3.3. Comparative Evaluation
All the recognition accuracies on the above four public
datasets, obtained by the proposed CRNN model and the
recent state-of-the-arts techniques including the approaches
based on deep models [23, 22, 21], are shown in Table 2.
In the constrained lexicon cases, our method consistently
outperforms most state-of-the-arts approaches, and in aver-
age beats the best text reader proposed in [22]. Speciﬁcally,
we obtain superior performance on IIIT5k, and SVT com-
pared to [22], only achieved lower performance on IC03
with the “Full” lexicon. Note that the model in[22] is
trained on a speciﬁc dictionary, namely that each word is
associated to a class label. Unlike [22], CRNN is not lim-
ited to recognize a word in a known dictionary, and able to
handle random strings (e.g. telephone numbers), sentences
or other scripts like Chinese words. Therefore, the results
of CRNN are competitive on all the testing datasets.
In the unconstrained lexicon cases, our method achieves
the best performance on SVT, yet, is still behind some ap-
proaches [8, 22] on IC03 and IC13. Note that the blanks
in the “none” columns of Table 2 denote that such ap-
proaches are unable to be applied to recognition without
lexicon or did not report the recognition accuracies in the
unconstrained cases. Our method uses only synthetic text
with word level labels as the training data, very different to
PhotoOCR [8] which used 7.9 millions of real word images
with character-level annotations for training. The best per-
formance is reported by [22] in the unconstrained lexicon
cases, beneﬁting from its large dictionary, however, it is not
a model strictly unconstrained to a lexicon as mentioned be-
fore. In this sense, our results in the unconstrained lexicon
Table 3. Comparison among various methods. Attributes for com-
parison include: 1) being end-to-end trainable (E2E Train); 2)
using convolutional features that are directly learned from im-
ages rather than using hand-crafted ones (Conv Ftrs); 3) requir-
ing no ground truth bounding boxes for characters during training
(CharGT-Free); 4) not conﬁned to a pre-deﬁned dictionary (Un-
constrained); 5) the model size (if an end-to-end trainable model
is used), measured by the number of model parameters (Model
Size, M stands for millions).
E2E Train
Conv Ftrs
CharGT-Free
Unconstrained
Model Size
Wang et al. [34]     -
Mishra et al. [28]     -
Wang et al. [35]     -
Goel et al. [13]     -
Bissacco et al. [8]     -
Alsharif and Pineau [6]     -
Almaz´an et al. [5]     -
Yao et al. [36]     -
Rodrguez-Serrano et al. [30]     -
Jaderberg et al. [23]     -
Su and Lu [33]     -
Gordo [14]     -
Jaderberg et al. [22]     490M
Jaderberg et al. [21]     304M
CRNN     8.3M
case are still promising.
For further understanding the advantages of the pro-
posed algorithm over other text recognition approaches, we
provide a comprehensive comparison on several properties
named E2E Train, Conv Ftrs, CharGT-Free, Unconstrained,
and Model Size, as summarized in Table 3.
E2E Train: This column is to show whether a certain
text reading model is end-to-end trainable, without any pre-
process or through several separated steps, which indicates
such approaches are elegant and clean for training. As can
be observed from Table 3, only the models based on deep
neural networks including [22, 21] as well as CRNN have
this property.
Conv Ftrs: This column is to indicate whether an ap-
proach uses the convolutional features learned from training
images directly or handcraft features as the basic represen-
tations.
CharGT-Free: This column is to indicate whether the
character-level annotations are essential for training the
model. As the input and output labels of CRNN can be a
sequence, character-level annotations are not necessary.
Unconstrained: This column is to indicate whether the
trained model is constrained to a speciﬁc dictionary, unable
to handling out-of-dictionary words or random sequences.
Table 2. Recognition accuracies (%) on four datasets. In the second row, “50”, “1k”, “50k” and “Full” denote the lexicon used, and “None”
denotes recognition without a lexicon. (*[22] is not lexicon-free in the strict sense, as its outputs are constrained to a 90k dictionary.
IIIT5k SVT IC03 IC13
50 1k None 50 None 50 Full 50k None None
ABBYY [34] 24.3 - - 35.0 - 56.0 55.0 - - -
Wang et al. [34] - - - 57.0 - 76.0 62.0 - - -
Mishra et al. [28] 64.1 57.5 - 73.2 - 81.8 67.8 - - -
Wang et al. [35] - - - 70.0 - 90.0 84.0 - - -
Goel et al. [13] - - - 77.3 - 89.7 - - - -
Bissacco et al. [8] - - - 90.4 78.0 - - - - 87.6
Alsharif and Pineau [6] - - - 74.3 - 93.1 88.6 85.1 - -
Almaz´an et al. [5] 91.2 82.1 - 89.2 - - - - - -
Yao et al. [36] 80.2 69.3 - 75.9 - 88.5 80.3 - - -
Rodrguez-Serrano et al. [30] 76.1 57.4 - 70.0 - - - - - -
Jaderberg et al. [23] - - - 86.1 - 96.2 91.5 - - -
Su and Lu [33] - - - 83.0 - 92.0 82.0 - - -
Gordo [14] 93.3 86.6 - 91.8 - - - - - -
Jaderberg et al. [22] 97.1 92.7 - 95.4 80.7* 98.7 98.6 93.3 93.1* 90.8*
Jaderberg et al. [21] 95.5 89.6 - 93.2 71.7 97.8 97.0 93.4 89.6 81.8
CRNN 97.6 94.4 78.2 96.4 80.8 98.7 97.6 95.5 89.4 86.7
Notice that though the recent models learned by label em-
bedding [5, 14] and incremental learning [22] achieved
highly competitive performance, they are constrained to a
speciﬁc dictionary.
Model Size: This column is to report the storage space
of the learned model. In CRNN, all layers have weight-
sharing connections, and the fully-connected layers are not
needed. Consequently, the number of parameters of CRNN
is much less than the models learned on the variants of CNN
[22, 21], resulting in a much smaller model compared with
[22, 21]. Our model has 8.3 million parameters, taking only
33MB RAM (using 4-bytes single-precision ﬂoat for each
parameter), thus it can be easily ported to mobile devices.
Table 3 clearly shows the differences among different ap-
proaches in details, and fully demonstrates the advantages
of CRNN over other competing methods.
In addition, to test the impact of parameter δ, we exper-
iment different values of δ in Eq. 2. In Fig. 4 we plot the
recognition accuracy as a function of δ. Larger δ results
in more candidates, thus more accurate lexicon-based tran-
scription. On the other hand, the computational cost grows
with larger δ, due to longer BK-tree search time, as well as
larger number of candidate sequences for testing. In prac-
tice, we choose δ = 3 as a tradeoff between accuracy and
speed.
3.4. Musical Score Recognition
A musical score typically consists of sequences of mu-
sical notes arranged on staff lines. Recognizing musical
scores in images is known as the Optical Music Recogni-
tion (OMR) problem. Previous methods often requires im-
age preprocessing (mostly binirization), staff lines detection
0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
Value ofδ
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98Recognition Accuracy
IC03 (50k lexicon)
<1ms 12ms 90ms
370ms
1220ms
2420ms
95.7% 95.9%
95.5%
93.7%
95.4%
89.4%
Figure 4. Blue line graph: recognition accuracy as a function pa-
rameter δ. Red bars: lexicon search time per sample. Tested on
the IC03 dataset with the 50k lexicon.
and individual notes recognition [29]. We cast the OMR
as a sequence recognition problem, and predict a sequence
of musical notes directly from the image with CRNN. For
simplicity, we recognize pitches only, ignore all chords and
assume the same major scales (C major) for all scores.
To the best of our knowledge, there exists no public
datasets for evaluating algorithms on pitch recognition. To
prepare the training data needed by CRNN, we collect 2650
images from [2]. Each image contains a fragment of score
containing 3 to 20 notes. We manually label the ground
truth label sequences (sequences of not ezpitches) for all
the images. The collected images are augmented to 265k
training samples by being rotated, scaled and corrupted with
noise, and by replacing their backgrounds with natural im-
ages. For testing, we create three datasets: 1) “Clean”,
which contains 260 images collected from [2]. Examples
are shown in Fig. 5.a; 2) “Synthesized”, which is created
from “Clean”, using the augmentation strategy mentioned
above. It contains 200 samples, some of which are shown
in Fig. 5.b; 3) “Real-World”, which contains 200 images
of score fragments taken from music books with a phone
camera. Examples are shown in Fig. 5.c.1
Figure 5. (a) Clean musical scores images collected from [2] (b)
Synthesized musical score images. (c) Real-world score images
taken with a mobile phone camera.
Since we have limited training data, we use a simpli-
ﬁed CRNN conﬁguration in order to reduce model capac-
ity. Different from the conﬁguration speciﬁed in Tab. 1,
the 4th and 6th convolution layers are removed, and the
2-layer bidirectional LSTM is replaced by a 2-layer sin-
gle directional LSTM. The network is trained on the pairs
of images and corresponding label sequences. Two mea-
sures are used for evaluating the recognition performance:
1) fragment accuracy,i.e. the percentage of score fragments
correctly recognized; 2) average edit distance, i.e. the av-
erage edit distance between predicted pitch sequences and
the ground truths. For comparison, we evaluate two com-
mercial OMR engines, namely the Capella Scan [3] and the
PhotoScore [4].
Table 4. Comparison of pitch recognition accuracies, among
CRNN and two commercial OMR systems, on the three datasets
we have collected. Performances are evaluated by fragment accu-
racies and average edit distance (“fragment accuracy/average edit
distance”).
Clean Synthesized Real-World
Capella Scan [3] 51.9%/1.75 20.0%/2.31 43.5%/3.05
PhotoScore [4] 55.0%/2.34 28.0%/1.85 20.4%/3.00
CRNN 74.6%/0.37 81.5%/0.30 84.0%/0.30
1We will release the dataset for academic use.
Tab. 4 summarizes the results. The CRNN outper-
forms the two commercial systems by a large margin. The
Capella Scan and PhotoScore systems perform reasonably
well on the Clean dataset, but their performances drop sig-
niﬁcantly on synthesized and real-world data. The main
reason is that they rely on robust binarization to detect staff
lines and notes, but the binarization step often fails on syn-
thesized and real-world data due to bad lighting condition,
noise corruption and cluttered background. The CRNN, on
the other hand, uses convolutional features that are highly
robust to noises and distortions. Besides, recurrent layers in
CRNN can utilize contextual information in the score. Each
note is recognized not only itself, but also by the nearby
notes. Consequently, some notes can be recognized by com-
paring them with the nearby notes, e.g. contrasting their
vertical positions.
The results have shown the generality of CRNN, in that
it can be readily applied to other image-based sequence
recognition problems, requiring minimal domain knowl-
edge. Compared with Capella Scan and PhotoScore, our
CRNN-based system is still preliminary and misses many
functionalities. But it provides a new scheme for OMR, and
has shown promising capabilities in pitch recognition.
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a novel neural net-
work architecture, called Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Network (CRNN), which integrates the advantages of both
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neu-
ral Networks (RNN). CRNN is able to take input images of
varying dimensions and produces predictions with different
lengths. It directly runs on coarse level labels ( e.g. words),
requiring no detailed annotations for each individual ele-
ment ( e.g. characters) in the training phase. Moreover,
as CRNN abandons fully connected layers used in conven-
tional neural networks, it results in a much more compact
and efﬁcient model. All these properties make CRNN an
excellent approach for image-based sequence recognition.
The experiments on the scene text recognition bench-
marks demonstrate that CRNN achieves superior or highly
competitive performance, compared with conventional
methods as well as other CNN and RNN based algorithms.
This conﬁrms the advantages of the proposed algorithm. In
addition, CRNN signiﬁcantly outperforms other competi-
tors on a benchmark for Optical Music Recognition (OMR),
which veriﬁes the generality of CRNN.
Actually, CRNN is a general framework, thus it can be
applied to other domains and problems (such as Chinese
character recognition), which involve sequence prediction
in images. To further speed up CRNN and make it more
practical in real-world applications is another direction that
is worthy of exploration in the future.
Acknowledgement
This work was primarily supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 61222308).
References
[1] http://hunspell.sourceforge.net/. 4, 5
[2] https://musescore.com/sheetmusic. 7, 8
[3] http://www.capella.de/us/index.
cfm/products/capella-scan/
info-capella-scan/. 8
[4] http://www.sibelius.com/products/
photoscore/ultimate.html. 8
[5] J. Almaz ´an, A. Gordo, A. Forn ´es, and E. Valveny. Word
spotting and recognition with embedded attributes. PAMI,
36(12):2552–2566, 2014. 2, 6, 7
[6] O. Alsharif and J. Pineau. End-to-end text recognition with
hybrid HMM maxout models. ICLR, 2014. 6, 7
[7] Y . Bengio, P. Y . Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-
term dependencies with gradient descent is difﬁcult. NN,
5(2):157–166, 1994. 3
[8] A. Bissacco, M. Cummins, Y . Netzer, and H. Neven. Pho-
toocr: Reading text in uncontrolled conditions. In ICCV,
2013. 1, 2, 6, 7
[9] W. A. Burkhard and R. M. Keller. Some approaches to best-
match ﬁle searching. Commun. ACM, 16(4):230–236, 1973.
4
[10] R. Collobert, K. Kavukcuoglu, and C. Farabet. Torch7: A
matlab-like environment for machine learning. In BigLearn,
NIPS Workshop, 2011. 6
[11] F. A. Gers, N. N. Schraudolph, and J. Schmidhuber. Learn-
ing precise timing with LSTM recurrent networks. JMLR,
3:115–143, 2002. 3
[12] R. B. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik. Rich
feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic
segmentation. In CVPR, 2014. 1, 3
[13] V . Goel, A. Mishra, K. Alahari, and C. V . Jawahar. Whole is
greater than sum of parts: Recognizing scene text words. In
ICDAR, 2013. 6, 7
[14] A. Gordo. Supervised mid-level features for word image rep-
resentation. In CVPR, 2015. 2, 6, 7
[15] A. Graves, S. Fern ´andez, F. J. Gomez, and J. Schmidhu-
ber. Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation: labelling unseg-
mented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In
ICML, 2006. 4, 5
[16] A. Graves, M. Liwicki, S. Fernandez, R. Bertolami,
H. Bunke, and J. Schmidhuber. A novel connectionist
system for unconstrained handwriting recognition. PAMI,
31(5):855–868, 2009. 2
[17] A. Graves, A. Mohamed, and G. E. Hinton. Speech recogni-
tion with deep recurrent neural networks. In ICASSP, 2013.
3
[18] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory.
Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. 3
[19] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In
ICML, 2015. 6
[20] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman.
Synthetic data and artiﬁcial neural networks for natural scene
text recognition. NIPS Deep Learning Workshop, 2014. 5
[21] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman.
Deep structured output learning for unconstrained text recog-
nition. In ICLR, 2015. 6, 7
[22] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman.
Reading text in the wild with convolutional neural networks.
IJCV (Accepted), 2015. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7
[23] M. Jaderberg, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Deep features
for text spotting. In ECCV, 2014. 2, 6, 7
[24] D. Karatzas, F. Shafait, S. Uchida, M. Iwamura, L. G. i Big-
orda, S. R. Mestre, J. Mas, D. F. Mota, J. Almaz ´an, and
L. de las Heras. ICDAR 2013 robust reading competition.
In ICDAR, 2013. 5
[25] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In
NIPS, 2012. 1, 3
[26] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. 1
[27] S. M. Lucas, A. Panaretos, L. Sosa, A. Tang, S. Wong,
R. Young, K. Ashida, H. Nagai, M. Okamoto, H. Yamamoto,
H. Miyao, J. Zhu, W. Ou, C. Wolf, J. Jolion, L. Todoran,
M. Worring, and X. Lin. ICDAR 2003 robust reading com-
petitions: entries, results, and future directions. IJDAR, 7(2-
3):105–122, 2005. 5
[28] A. Mishra, K. Alahari, and C. V . Jawahar. Scene text recog-
nition using higher order language priors. In BMVC, 2012.
5, 6, 7
[29] A. Rebelo, I. Fujinaga, F. Paszkiewicz, A. R. S. Marc ¸al,
C. Guedes, and J. S. Cardoso. Optical music recognition:
state-of-the-art and open issues. IJMIR, 1(3):173–190, 2012.
7
[30] J. A. Rodr ´ıguez-Serrano, A. Gordo, and F. Perronnin. Label
embedding: A frugal baseline for text recognition. IJCV,
113(3):193–207, 2015. 2, 6, 7
[31] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams. Neuro-
computing: Foundations of research. chapter Learning Rep-
resentations by Back-propagating Errors, pages 696–699.
MIT Press, 1988. 5
[32] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolu-
tional networks for large-scale image recognition. CoRR,
abs/1409.1556, 2014. 5
[33] B. Su and S. Lu. Accurate scene text recognition based on
recurrent neural network. In ACCV, 2014. 2, 6, 7
[34] K. Wang, B. Babenko, and S. Belongie. End-to-end scene
text recognition. In ICCV, 2011. 5, 6, 7
[35] T. Wang, D. J. Wu, A. Coates, and A. Y . Ng. End-to-end text
recognition with convolutional neural networks. In ICPR,
2012. 1, 6, 7
[36] C. Yao, X. Bai, B. Shi, and W. Liu. Strokelets: A learned
multi-scale representation for scene text recognition. In
CVPR, 2014. 2, 6, 7
[37] M. D. Zeiler. ADADELTA: an adaptive learning rate method.
CoRR, abs/1212.5701, 2012. 5
